# Tip 008

## Chunk Your Undos

1. tip:

> As I write this text(in Vim, of course), I often pause at the end of a sentence to consider what I'll write next. No matter how brief its duration, each pause forms a natural break point, giving me a cue to leave Insert mode. When I'm ready to continue writing, I press `A` and carry on where I left off.

> If I decide that I've taken a wrong turn, I'll switch to Normal mode and press `u`. Each time I undo, my text decomposes in coherent chunks that correspond to my thought process as I was writing the original text. It means that I can easily try out a sentence or two and throw them away with a couple of keystrokes.

> If I'm in Insert mode with my cursor at the end of a line, the quickest way to open a new line is to press `<CR>`. And yet I sometimes prefer to press `<Esc>o` just because I anticipate that I might want that extra granulariy from the undo command. If this sounds hard core, don't worry. As you become adept with Vim, switching modes feels more and more lightweight.

> As a general rule, If you've paused for long enough to ask the question, "Should I leave Insert mode", then do it.

1. snippet:

```js
// null
```

3. more:

When I said that the undo command would revert all characters entered(or deleted) during a trip into Insert mode and back, I was glossing over a small detail. If we use the `<Up>`, `<Down>`, `<Left>`, or `<Right>` cursor keys while in Insert mode, a new undo chunk is created. It's just as though we had switched abck to Normal mode to move around with the `h`, `j`, `k`, `l` commands, except that we don't have to leave Insert mode. This also has implications on the operation of the dot command.
